Adding a volt/current meter I've found to be a valuable asset to almost any project, 
whether it be an SW kit or any other kit or homebrew device.  I was first shown the 
technique by my elmer, an electronics technician with many years working for the 
broadcast industry and a big-time homebrewer.

First, you have to find a meter movement.  I have not yet used any digital meters, so I 
can't speak for them.  The meters I have used are old analog meters, some off of old 
50s/60s vintage gear, some possibly even older, usually purchased at swap meets.  You 
can also find these meters at specialty electronics stores.  Here in Tucson, there's a place 
called Elliots that sells them.  Radio shacks may carry analog movements as well, but 
they can be pricey.

As for the type of movement, it all depends on what you want.  Many meter movements 
are already set up to measure voltage or current, and they have a built-in resistor network 
so that if you apply 10V across the terminals, for example, the meter will point to a "10" 
on the scale.  These are fine if all you want to do is measure the same voltage or current 
levels, and if the scale on them is already what you find useful.  You may be able to 
break into the meter's circuit and remove or modify the resistors.  I've personally never 
done this, so I can't vouch for that type of mod.

The meters I tend to shop for are ones that have no built-in network and are usually 
scrapped out of old equipment, where the network was external to the meter movement.  
These meters will have a small stamp on the face, usually towards the bottom, stating 
how many microamps it takes to drive the needle to full scale (something like FS = 
60uA).  You can't simply hook it up to your circuit to measure anything, unless you are 
interested in microamp or millivolt type readings.  You have to make your own resistor 
network.

All you need for this is Ohm's Law:  Volts = Amps * Resistance, or V = I * R.  Nothing 
magic about it.  First though you need to find out what voltage is needed to drive the 
needle to full scale.  You can look at the meter face and calculate how to obtain that full-
scale current value, or (and what I always do) you can experimentally determine what 
drives the needle to full scale for the voltages you wish to measure.  For example, say I 
want 12V to be full scale.  I know that the meter says that 100 uA is full scale.  So using 
Ohm's Law, I know that I can obtain the R needed by taking 12 V / 100 uA = 120 K-ohm 
resistance.  So I just put the 120K resistor in SERIES (not parallel) with the 12 V source, 
keeping an eye on the polarity of the meter (feed the positive voltage terminal through the 
resistor and then to the positive meter terminal, for instance, and the negative terminal of 
the meter goes back to ground).  

Fire it up and see what happens.  Since real-world results typically are different from 
theory, you will likely have to adjust the resistor values up or down in order to peg right 
at the full scale mark.  That's where the experimenting comes in.  Keep in mind also that 
different types of resistors are more or less temperature variant than others (beyond the 
scope of this discussion!).  So once you find out what values are optimal for full-scale 
deflection at the voltage of interest, you may want to install high-quality components for 
the final network.

For a current meter, a very similar procedure is used.  This time, the voltage that drives 
the meter is obtained through a very small value of resistance in series with the power 
supply.  So instead of the positive supply line going directly to your SW20 circuit, you 
intercept it first and make it pass through a 1 Ohm resistor, say, and then the current will 
make its way to the SW20.

Here I'll make a note of something else that is important.  For voltage or current meters, 
you want to make sure that the full-scale reading consumes a very small amount of 
current, for obvious reasons.  You don't want all your battery pack energy wasted in 
deflecting a needle!  Most of the time this has not been an issue for me because meters 
are designed for that idea in mind and consume very little energy (in the example above, 
100 uA, or .1 mA, is all).  But at least do a quick calculation for current consumption 
before installing the meter.

Ok back to the current meter.  Usually the 100 uA meter like the one mentioned above 
will only need millivolts (or less) to push it to full-scale deflection.  Once you establish 
what value of current is needed for full-scale (from making a voltmeter or just through 
experimentation), you can calculate what the voltage drop is across the meter.  One way 
to do this is take an existing current meter, drive the resistor network with the voltage you 
want that drives it to full-scale, and measure that current.  Using ohms law, just take V / I 
to get the total resistance of the circuit.  Since you know the value of the R that you put in 
the network, then you know that whatever is left is due to resistance of the meter 
movement (which will be quite low).  Another way you can go is to set up the meter 
circuit to drive the needle to full scale, then take a sensitive volt meter and measure the 
voltage across the meter terminals.  However, since this voltage is quite small, the 
influence of the meter you use to measure it may drop the voltage of the meter under test!  
Anyhow, try to get an estimate of either the resistance or the full-scale voltage, and use 
ohms law to calculate the full-scale voltage if necessary.

Once you know the full-scale voltage, all you need to do is use Ohm's Law again to find 
out what value of resistor to put in series with your rig to measure current. Let's say full-
scale is 100 mV. Make a measurement of your current draw for the circuit, and decide 
what you want your full-scale current reading to be. Let's say you decide on 100 mA. Use 
Ohms law and calculate the R needed for a voltage drop of 100mV: R = V / I = 100 mV / 
100 mA = 1 ohm. So, a circuit drawing 100 mA will cause a voltage drop of 100 mV 
across a 1 ohm resistor. And that 100 mV will cause your needle to deflect to a full-scale  
reading. 
 
Note that the power supply voltage was irrelevant in this calculation. The critical value 
was current. Also, check the current consumption with the addition of 1 Ohm. Will it 
cause an appreciable increase in current draw for the power supply? Instinct tells you no, 
because 1 ohm is a very small level of additional resistance. But if you want to, you can 
attempt to calculate it. Find the total circuit resistance by taking V / I, which in this case  
would be 12 V / 100 mA = 120 ohms. By adding 1 more ohm, your circuit current 
decreases to 12 V / 121 Ohms = 99.2 mA. So the 1 ohm resistance uses up only an 
additional .8 mA of current! Not much to worry about, in this case. 
 
Again, you will likely have to experiment with slightly lower or higher series resistances 
in order to get the 100 mA (or whatever value you choose) to hit the full-scale reading. 
This can be tricky with the current-sensing resistor, since the values are usually  
around 1 ohm or less. Remember you can combine resistors in parallel to get different 
values. For example, two 1-ohms in parallel will give you a 1/2 ohm resistor. 
 
A couple of other points. You need to calculate the power that will be consumed by your 
resistor and make sure you are using a resistor rated for that power, otherwise you will 
notice it getting very hot, its value will change and it may disintegrate! Just take the full- 
scale amps * volts. In this case, .1 A * .1 V = .01 Watts or 10 mW. So a garden-variety 
1/4 W (250 mW) resistor ought to work fine for this application. 
 
It may seem confusing at first, but as you do more meters it becomes second nature.  
 
Again, there are other meters out there which I am not familiar with, and there may be 
more sophisticated methods to achieve the same goals. I'm just giving you the methods 
that have worked for me on my projects. 
 
Aesthetics: 
 
Another issue outside of the electronics involved is re-calibration of the scale. If you 
bought a meter that already has the voltage or current scale on it that you want, then you 
don't have to worry about it. If on the other hand the meter that you have has completely  
unrelated numbers to what you want, you will probably want to re-scale it. Now the old 
analog meters that I'm used to using have bolts and nuts coming out the back side. All 
you have to do is loosen the hardware and the front panel will snap or slide off. Of  
course be very careful not to disturb the needle or movement hardware. The backing plate 
(the thing with numbers printed on it) is usually attached by two miniature screws, like 
the kinds you find in watches. If you carefully unscrew them, you can slide the plate  
off of the meter housing. Then using a clean fresh pencil eraser, you can rub off the old 
numerals. Be careful to not rub off the scale markers, just the numbers above and below. 
It takes a lot of time but they will generally come off. Then what I do is purchase  
some "transfer letters" from an art supply store. They come on these waxy paper sheets 
and there are different fonts available. All you do is line up the numbers you want onto 
the scale markers, and rub the paper to transfer the letter onto the face. If you can find 
self-adhesive number stickers, that would be even better. With the transfer letters, since 
they do not have very good adhesion, you will need to also pick up some clear-coat 
spray-on stuff. The one I use is called "Crystal Clear" I believe, and I think it was made 
by Krylon. It's a transparent coating that you spray on from a paint can type sprayer, and 
in a few minutes it dries and whatever is underneath it will be glued down by the film. It 
works great.  
 
The finished product will look very professional, especially if you have a lot of 
mechanical ability and good tools (I don't have either!). Even with my bungling, my 
meters have turned out pretty good. The hardest part of the entire process for me has been  
creating mounting holes to house the meter in the box. I generally use metal boxes 
because I don't like working with plastic, but I have not found an easy way to create nice, 
round holes through the metal that are the 2 or 3 inches in diameter necessary to mount 
the meter. I have used tin snips and metal jigsaw blades, but they are not the  
best way to go. I've heard that if you can find a metal hole-saw, like what are used to drill 
holes for door knobs, that these will create a very nice smooth hole. Someone who is 
more skilled in metal working may have a better suggestion. 
 
I hope this helps. 72, 73, and enjoy your building. 
 
Bert WF7I
